# Estimating the effect of the 2006 Health Care Reform in Massachusetts on health insurance coverage and health outcomes using the Synthetic Control Method (SCM)

This paper seeks to examine the effects of the 2006 Health Care Reform in Massachusetts, which established a common market to purchase health insurance, provided low-cost insurance for people ineligible for employer-sponsored health care, and expanded Medicaid coverage within the state prior to the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act. Past randomized controlled trials (RCTs) such as the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (1971-86) and Oregon Medicaid Lottery (2009) have found that reduced health care costs increased utilization of services without improving health outcomes. The purpose of this paper is to determine whether the effects of Massachusetts's Health Care Reform on health outcomes are consistent with the findings of these RCTs. Using the synthetic control method, I constructed a counterfactual for an event study examining the effect of the Massachusetts Health Care Reform on health insurance coverage and crude mortality rate. From 2006 to 2009, I found a statistically significant decrease in the share of uninsured individuals in Massachusetts by about 7.9 percentage points compared to the synthetic control. By 2009, private insurance coverage saw a statistically significant  increase of about 3.76 percentage points, while Medicaid coverage increased by about 4.98 percentage points but was not found to be statistically significant after simulating a series of placebo effects and taking the rank of the mean squared prediction error. I also found a small, statistically insignificant decrease in the crude mortality rate by 19.75 deaths per 100,000 by 2008 and around 12.25 deaths per 100,000 by 2009. The implications of these findings can inform optimal implementation of market-oriented expansion of health coverage.
